p8105_hw2_sd3730.md, before:

p8105_hw2_sd3730
================
Stacey Dai

# Question 1

This code is used to set up the RMarkdown file and load necessary
packages.

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(dplyr)
```

This code is to read and clean the data, keep variables, and convert the
entry variable from character to logical variable.

``` r
transit_data = read.csv("./NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv", 
                          na = c("NA", ".","")) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  select(line, station_name, station_latitude, station_longitude, starts_with("route"), entry,
         vending, entrance_type, ada) |>
    mutate(entry = ifelse(entry == "YES", TRUE, FALSE)) 
```

### Dataset Description

The NYC Transit dataset contains details about the stations, including
station name and location, routes served by the stations, entrance and
exits for each subway station in New York City. The dataset also
contains information about vending machines in the station and ADA.

The data cleaning steps involved reading the CSV file, cleaning the
column names using janitor, selecting relevant columns, and converting
the entry variable from character values (“YES”/“NO”) to a logical
variable (TRUE/FALSE). The resulting dataset has dimensions of 1868 rows
and 19 columns. The dataset is considered tidy as each variable forms a
column, each observation forms a row, and each type of observational
unit is a table.

How many distinct stations are there?

``` r
distinct_stations_count = transit_data |>
  distinct (station_name, line) |>
  nrow()
distinct_stations_count
```

There are 465 distinct subway stations.

How many stations are ADA compliant?

``` r
ada_compliant_count = transit_data |>
  filter(ada == TRUE) |>
  nrow()
ada_compliant_count
```

There are 468 stations that are ADA compliant.

What proportion of station entrances / exits without vending allow
entrance?

``` r
no_vending_proportion = transit_data |>
  filter(vending == "NO") |>
  summarise(proportion_entry_allowed = mean(entry, na.rm = TRUE)) |>
  pull(proportion_entry_allowed)

no_vending_proportion
```

Proportion of Entrances/Exits without Vending that Allow Entrance:
0.3770492 of entrances/exits without vending allow entrance.

Reformat data so that route number and route name are distinct
variables.

``` r
library(tidyr)

transit_data <- transit_data |>
  mutate(across(starts_with("route"), as.character)) 

transit_data_long <- transit_data |>
  pivot_longer(cols = starts_with("route"), 
               names_to = "route_number", 
               values_to = "route_name", 
               values_drop_na = TRUE)

distinct_a_train_stations <- transit_data_long |>
  filter(route_name == "A") |>
  distinct(station_name, line) |>
  nrow()

ada_compliant_a_train_count <- transit_data_long |>
  filter(route_name == "A", ada == TRUE) |>
  distinct(station_name, line) |>
  nrow()

distinct_a_train_stations
ada_compliant_a_train_count
```

There are 60 distinct stations that serve the A train. Of the stations
that serve the A train, there are 17 compliant stations.

\#Question 2

This code is used to set up the RMarkdown file and load necessary
packages.

``` r
library(readxl)
library(janitor)
library(dplyr)
```

Read and clean the Mr. Trash Wheel data

``` r
mr_trash_wheel = read_excel("./202409 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                              sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", 
                              skip = 1, 
                              col_names = TRUE) |>
    filter(!is.na(Dumpster)) |>
    select(Date, Dumpster, `Weight (tons)`, `Cigarette Butts`, `Sports Balls`) |>
    mutate(
        Trash_Wheel = "Mr. Trash Wheel",
        `Sports Balls` = as.integer(round(`Sports Balls`))
    )
```

Read and clean the Professor Trash Wheel data

``` r
prof_trash_wheel = read_excel("./202409 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                                sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", 
                                skip = 1) |>
    filter(!is.na(Dumpster)) |>
    select(Date, Dumpster, `Weight (tons)`, `Cigarette Butts`) |>
    mutate(Trash_Wheel = "Professor Trash Wheel")
```

Read and clean the Gwynnda data

``` r
gwynnda = read_excel("./202409 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                      sheet = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel", 
                      skip = 1) |>
    filter(!is.na(Dumpster)) |>
    select(Date, Dumpster, `Weight (tons)`, `Cigarette Butts`) |>
    mutate(Trash_Wheel = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel")
```

``` r
combined_data = bind_rows(mr_trash_wheel, prof_trash_wheel, gwynnda)

head(combined_data)
```

``` r
total_weight_professor = sum(combined_data$`Weight (tons)`[combined_data$Trash_Wheel == "Professor Trash Wheel"], na.rm = TRUE)
```

``` r
total_cigarette_butts_gwynnda_june = sum(combined_data$`Cigarette Butts`[combined_data$Trash_Wheel == "Gwynnda" & format(as.Date(combined_data$Date), "%Y-%m") == "2022-06"], na.rm = TRUE)
```

``` r
total_observations = nrow(combined_data)
```

Commit message:

set up and load packages for question 3

p8105_hw2_sd3730.md, after:

p8105_hw2_sd3730
================
Stacey Dai

# Question 1

This code is used to set up the RMarkdown file and load necessary
packages.

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(dplyr)
```

This code is to read and clean the data, keep variables, and convert the
entry variable from character to logical variable.

``` r
transit_data = read.csv("./NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv", 
                          na = c("NA", ".","")) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  select(line, station_name, station_latitude, station_longitude, starts_with("route"), entry,
         vending, entrance_type, ada) |>
    mutate(entry = ifelse(entry == "YES", TRUE, FALSE)) 
```

### Dataset Description

The NYC Transit dataset contains details about the stations, including
station name and location, routes served by the stations, entrance and
exits for each subway station in New York City. The dataset also
contains information about vending machines in the station and ADA.

The data cleaning steps involved reading the CSV file, cleaning the
column names using janitor, selecting relevant columns, and converting
the entry variable from character values (“YES”/“NO”) to a logical
variable (TRUE/FALSE). The resulting dataset has dimensions of 1868 rows
and 19 columns. The dataset is considered tidy as each variable forms a
column, each observation forms a row, and each type of observational
unit is a table.

How many distinct stations are there?

``` r
distinct_stations_count = transit_data |>
  distinct (station_name, line) |>
  nrow()
distinct_stations_count
```

There are 465 distinct subway stations.

How many stations are ADA compliant?

``` r
ada_compliant_count = transit_data |>
  filter(ada == TRUE) |>
  nrow()
ada_compliant_count
```

There are 468 stations that are ADA compliant.

What proportion of station entrances / exits without vending allow
entrance?

``` r
no_vending_proportion = transit_data |>
  filter(vending == "NO") |>
  summarise(proportion_entry_allowed = mean(entry, na.rm = TRUE)) |>
  pull(proportion_entry_allowed)

no_vending_proportion
```

Proportion of Entrances/Exits without Vending that Allow Entrance:
0.3770492 of entrances/exits without vending allow entrance.

Reformat data so that route number and route name are distinct
variables.

``` r
library(tidyr)

transit_data <- transit_data |>
  mutate(across(starts_with("route"), as.character)) 

transit_data_long <- transit_data |>
  pivot_longer(cols = starts_with("route"), 
               names_to = "route_number", 
               values_to = "route_name", 
               values_drop_na = TRUE)

distinct_a_train_stations <- transit_data_long |>
  filter(route_name == "A") |>
  distinct(station_name, line) |>
  nrow()

ada_compliant_a_train_count <- transit_data_long |>
  filter(route_name == "A", ada == TRUE) |>
  distinct(station_name, line) |>
  nrow()

distinct_a_train_stations
ada_compliant_a_train_count
```

There are 60 distinct stations that serve the A train. Of the stations
that serve the A train, there are 17 compliant stations.

\#Question 2

This code is used to set up the RMarkdown file and load necessary
packages.

``` r
library(readxl)
library(janitor)
library(dplyr)
```

Read and clean the Mr. Trash Wheel data

``` r
mr_trash_wheel = read_excel("./202409 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                              sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", 
                              skip = 1, 
                              col_names = TRUE) |>
    filter(!is.na(Dumpster)) |>
    select(Date, Dumpster, `Weight (tons)`, `Cigarette Butts`, `Sports Balls`) |>
    mutate(
        Trash_Wheel = "Mr. Trash Wheel",
        `Sports Balls` = as.integer(round(`Sports Balls`))
    )
```

Read and clean the Professor Trash Wheel data

``` r
prof_trash_wheel = read_excel("./202409 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                                sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", 
                                skip = 1) |>
    filter(!is.na(Dumpster)) |>
    select(Date, Dumpster, `Weight (tons)`, `Cigarette Butts`) |>
    mutate(Trash_Wheel = "Professor Trash Wheel")
```

Read and clean the Gwynnda data

``` r
gwynnda = read_excel("./202409 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                      sheet = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel", 
                      skip = 1) |>
    filter(!is.na(Dumpster)) |>
    select(Date, Dumpster, `Weight (tons)`, `Cigarette Butts`) |>
    mutate(Trash_Wheel = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel")
```

``` r
combined_data = bind_rows(mr_trash_wheel, prof_trash_wheel, gwynnda)

head(combined_data)
```

``` r
total_weight_professor = sum(combined_data$`Weight (tons)`[combined_data$Trash_Wheel == "Professor Trash Wheel"], na.rm = TRUE)
```

``` r
total_cigarette_butts_gwynnda_june <- sum(
  combined_data$`Cigarette Butts`[
    combined_data$Trash_Wheel == "Gwynnda Trash Wheel" & format(as.Date(combined_data$Date), "%Y-%m") == "2022-06"
  ],
  na.rm = TRUE
)

options(scipen = 999)
```

``` r
total_observations = nrow(combined_data)
```

The combined dataset comprises 1033 observations from three trash wheel
datasets: Mr. Trash Wheel, Professor Trash Wheel, and Gwynnda. Key
variables include the date of collection, the dumpster used, the weight
of trash collected in tons, the number of cigarette butts collected, and
the number of sports balls collected. From the available data, the total
weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel is 246.74 tons.
Additionally, Gwynnda collected a total of 18120 cigarette butts in June
2022.

# Question 3

This code is used to set up the RMarkdown file and load necessary
packages.

``` r
library(dplyr)
library(tidyr)
library(readr)
library(janitor)
```
